





<div class="commentary">

60. First of all, the cat in a jar is a reference to the Wizard's
Workroom on Level 1 of Quasqueton, the dungeon described in Mike Carr's
*In Search of the Unknown*. As in that module, I didn't have any purpose
in putting this strange item here except whimsy. I thought it'd mystify
the players and provide a little bit of fun for me. Plus, homages and
allusions are important to me. I see it as a way to pay respect to one's
creative inspirations and module B1 is a huge one for me.

I fully expected that, when the characters unstopped the jar, they'd be
surprised when the cat jumped out and then would let it go without any
fuss. Instead, the cleric in the party, who had memorized *speak with
animals*, decided to ask the cat what he knew. I thought this was
brilliant on several levels. I felt the need to reward this kind of
thinking, so I quickly came up with the idea that the cat was feline
royalty—the son of the King of Cats. The cat, though, disguised his true
identity for a time, unsure of who the characters were or what they were
doing in Dwimmermount. Until he had a better sense of things, he refused
to give his name, leading the magic-user in the party to dub him
“Dusty.”

</div>

<div class="commentary">

Dusty knew a bit about Dwimmermount, but his information was somewhat
out of date, since he's been held in that jar for two centuries. What he
really wanted, though, was to return to the City-State of Adamas, where
he hoped to return to the court of the Cat King. Mention of the Cat King
intrigued the characters, who'd never heard of such a personage
before—perfectly reasonable, since I only just invented him! As I
mentioned in the comments to Room 46 on Level 1, I looked to the beast
lords of Michael Moorcock's Elric stories for my initial inspiration,
but I quickly moved beyond that, since Moorcock's conceptions didn't
quite fit with the kind of world I was trying to present.

</div>

<div class="commentary">

The characters visited the King of Cats many times, often bargaining
with him for information in exchange for aiding cats in need of
assistance in Adamas and other locales. I'm personally not very fond of
cats, so I tended to portray the King as venal, vain, and selfish. He
kept mice and birds in cages around his throne, which was a pile of
pillows up in the attic of the Doomed Lion tavern. Other cats served him
and there would sometimes be delegations from other animals who wanted
to enlist the aid of the cats.

</div>

<div class="commentary">

This is when the idea of the Rat Boss started to appear in my
imagination. I conceived of him as the rodent counterpart of the Cat
King, though more along the lines of a mafia boss (hence his title). He
was completely untrustworthy and the characters knew it, but he was a
lot of fun to roleplay. He had a daughter named Muriel who was a
wererat. The characters rescued her when she was being held captive by
some Termaxian agents who wanted to impress the Rat Boss and his minions
into their service. 

</div>

<div class="commentary">

I offhandedly mentioned the existence of a Dog King, too, but the
characters never encountered him.

</div>
