**Level 2A: The Laboratory**

### Wandering Monsters: Level 2A

Rolls | Monster
------+-------------
1     | 2–8 Orcs
2     | 1 Gray Ooze
3     | 1–6 Gnolls
4     | 2–8 Orcs
5     | 1–6 Ghouls
6     | 1–8 Spitting Beetles
7     | 3–18 Giant Rats
8     | 1 Green Slime
9     | 1–3 Carcass Scavengers
10    | 5–8 NPC Adventurers
11    | 1 Gelatinous Cube
12    | 1–6 Gnolls

### 1. Atrium

The walls of this circular room have many metal hooks on which hang
weapons and shields. The room is currently occupied by 5 orcs, acting as
guards for their brethren. As soon as they encounter any opposition, one
of their number will attempt to flee to Room 41 to gather
reinforcements. In the event that the remaining orcs lose more than half
their number or otherwise break morale, they will do the same.

*Orc Guards*(5) [AL C, MV 120' (40'), AC 6. HD 1, HP 6, 5, 4, 2, 1, \#AT
1, DG 1d8, SV F1, ML 10]

### 2. Storeroom

This room contains metal shelving units bolted to the walls. Most of the
shelves are completely empty; a few hold ceramic jars filled with
colored liquids. Because the ceramic is opaque, roll 1d4 to determine
the contents of any jar a character wishes to open:

1. Blue: Poison (save at +1 or die)
2. Green: Acts as a potion of healing
3. Red: Tastes horrible but otherwise has no effect
4. Yellow: Acts as *potion of gaseous form*

There are 1–3 jars filled with each type of liquid available the first
time the characters enter the room. Should they ever return to this
room, they will discover that all the remaining jars are gone—destroyed)
by the orcs in Room 41.

<div class="commentary">
    
2. I love random effects. My love of them almost certainly stems from
the infamous Room of Pools in Mike Carr's *In Search of the Unknown*,
the very first D&D module I ever owned. I have fond memories running my
friends through that module and watching them test each pool to try and
figure out what its effects might be before drinking from it.
Consequently, there are quite a few rooms in Dwimmermount in a similar
vein.

</div>

### 3. Sandpit

The floor of this room is almost covered by a fine white sand. The sand
is highest in the southwest corner, reaching approximately 2 feet in
height. Elsewhere, the sand is only a few inches in depth, with
occasional piles of greater depth scattered about the room. There is a
shovel buried in the sand along the eastern wall. Also buried in the
sand is a large number of silver coins—500 sp in total.

### 4. Water Tanks

This room contains six large tanks. All six tanks are glass, reinforced
with metal and all but one are full and intact. They contain salt water.

Shards of glass surround the damaged tank. There is no evidence of any
water, suggesting it has been some time since the damage occurred. All
the tanks have a locked, sliding metal door set low into the glass. If
opened, the water will spill out into the room.

### 5. Trapped Ooze

This room contains another tank. Unlike those in Room 4, this tank is
larger, being 10 feet in diameter and reaching almost to the ceiling
(approximately 7 feet). Also, this tank is made from a smoked glass that
obscures its actual contents—a large gray ooze! The ooze will attack
anyone who opens the sliding metal door near its base.

*Gray Ooze*(1) [AL N, MV 10' (3'), AC 8. HD 3, HP 23, \#AT 1, DG 2d8, SV
F2, ML 12]

<div class="commentary">

5. Before I ever played D&D, I played David Megarry's Dungeon!
boardgame. I remember many things about that game, but what I recall
most vividly are the monster cards. The cards that most delighted my
friends and I were the ones for green slime and black pudding—two
monsters that seemed bizarre to us at the time. Once I read my first D&D
rulebook, I discovered more about these monsters and came to develop a
fascination with them. Perhaps unsurprisingly, there are lots of slimy
creatures in Dwimmermount.

</div>

### 6. Office

This large room was once well-appointed with furnishings of heavy wood.
Some of these are smashed to pieces, but a desk remains unharmed. The
desk has five drawers, one of which is locked and trapped. The other
drawers contain only dust and scraps of paper. The trap on the fifth
drawer is acts as a *potion of diminution* to all within a 10-foot
radius who fail to make a saving throw versus poison. The effect lasts
for 1–6 turns. Inside the trapped drawer is a scroll with the spells
*protection from evil* and *web*.

### 7. Supply Room

The door to this room is locked. Its interior is dusty and filled with a
variety of supplies once used when the level was inhabited. These
supplies include:

- A 200' coil of copper wire
- A box of silver spikes (20 in all -- worth approximately 1000 gp)
- A box of wooden stakes (50)
- A stack of cast iron blocks (200)
- Six thick glass window panes
- A large chest containing glass jars, vials, alembics, and similar alchemical gear
- A jug of dried glue

### 8. Crystal Garden

Large crystals in a variety of colors fill this chamber. The crystals
cover most of the floor, the walls, and parts of the ceiling. In various
places, the crystals seem to have almost crude humanoid shapes. In one
instance, it looks like a well-carved human male dressed in armor and
wielding a sword and shield. The figure is missing its head. Looking
around the room, the characters can find the severed head, which depicts
a bearded man, lying on the floor. The head is somewhat worse for wear,
but is intact. If placed atop the figure, it adheres to it and the
figure springs to life, attacking its restorer.

Crystal Animated Statue (1) [AL L, MV 90' (30'), AC 4. HD 3, HP 13, \#AT
2, DG 1d6/1d6, SV F3, ML 11]

The crystals in the room are of an unknown sort and may be of some value
to jewelers and sages if brought back in sufficient quantities.

<div class="commentary">

8. Along with mushrooms, crystals signify the Weird in my imagination.
Crystals also have associations in my mind with “magical technology,” so
it was inevitable that they make an appearance here (and elsewhere).

</div>

### 9. Stairwell

The circular stairs in this room lead to Level 3A below. The room,
however, is blocked by two gates made of iron bars, cutting it off from
corridors to the north and south. Characters with high Strength may
attempt to force the gates open, though the chance is slight. For a
Strength of 12-13, the chance is 5%; for 14-15, the chance is 10%; for
16-17, the chance is 15%; and for 18, the chance is 20%. Alternately,
characters can find Room 14 and open the gates from there.

### 10. Patrol Area

This large area is patrolled by 3 gnolls. The gnolls will flee to Room
12 if they are outnumbered, where others of their kind of set up camp.

*Gnolls*(3) [AL C, MV 90' (30'), AC 5. HD 2, HP 11, 9, 6, \#AT 1, DG
1d8+1, SV F2, ML 8]

Between them, the gnolls have collected several gems: a banded agate (50
gp), a sardonyx (75 gp), a turquoise (10 gp), a moonstone (75 gp), an
obsidian (50 gp), and a citrine (100 gp).

### 11. Cage Room

This room contains a large number of metal cages, stacked haphazardly
along its walls. Several of the cages contain the skeletal remains of
small humanoid creatures of indeterminate type.

### 12. Gnoll Camp

This chamber contains 7 recently-spawned gnolls, which have begun
exploring this level on the order of their creator, the magician Varazes
(see Room 50). So far, though, they have met with little success, owing
to the many dangers of the Laboratory, as well as fierce opposition from
the more numerous orcs.

*Gnolls*(6) [AL C, MV 90' (30'), AC 5. HD 2, HP 14, 11, 9(x2), 6, 5 \#AT
1, DG 1d8+1, SV F2, ML 8]

*Gnoll Leader*(1) [AL C, MV 90' (30'), AC 5. HD 3, HP 16, \#AT 1, DG
1d8+1, SV F3, ML 8]

Between them, the gnolls have amassed the following treasure: 2000 cp, a
coronet (1700 gp), a silver chalice (200 gp), a pendant (200 gp), a
golden arm band (1300 gp), and a jeweled belt (400 gp).

### 13. Storeroom

The door to this room is locked. Its interior contains a dozen wooden
barrels, many of which have either rotted or been broken, spilling their
contents on the ground. These contents consist of dried fruits and
salted meat, none of which is edible now.

### 14. Control Room

This secret room contains the controls that raise and lower the gates to
Room 9. The room also contains other machinery tied to other areas of
the level, such as a dial that raises and lowers the barrier surrounding
the Pool of Life in Room 50 (it's currently lowered) and levers that
lock and unlock the doors to Room 48 and 49 (both are currently
unlocked). Using any of these controls causes a light to brighten on a
nearby panel, indicating that when a door, gate, or barrier is in a
locked, closed, or lowered position. In addition, using them creates a
large amount of noise that echoes through the level, which calls for an
immediate roll on the Wandering Monster Table.

<div class="commentary">

14. When I first started playing D&D, mapping out the dungeon was
deemed an important activity. If you didn't have an accurate map, you
might not be able to find your way out again. Likewise, mapping made it
easier to intuit the location of secret doors, hidden rooms, and similar
such features. Mapping, though, is a hard sell to many contemporary
players. I didn't want to force the practice on my players, but I did
want to encourage and reward it. So, when I started putting Dwimmermount
together, I included numerous rooms that, though separated by distance,
nevertheless had connections that became more obvious if you took the
time to make a map.

Room 14 is located right next to Room 9, but, since it's a hidden room,
its connection to it might not be as apparent if you didn't look at it
on the map. At least, that was my intention, though, in play, it wasn't
as clear as I had hoped.

</div>

### 15. Archive

The walls of this room are covered with bookshelves, most of which are
filled with moldering scrolls and codices. If touched, they crumbled
into worthless (and illegible) fragments. However, amongst the moldering
ones can be found two items of value, if the characters are willing to
devote at least 1 turn to searching the shelves. The first is a scroll
of *ward against undead*. The second is a treasure map written in a
magical script (requiring *read languages* to decipher) that leads to a
treasure worth 20,000 gp located not far from the fortress of Muntburg.

<div class="commentary">

15. I got tired of hearing from D&D players about “useless” spells that
no cleric or magic-user would ever want to memorize. A good example of
this is the 1st-level magic-user spell *read languages*, which is
actually extremely useful. The problem seems to be that many referees
don't make an effort to include obstacles that can be overcome through
the timely use of this spell. For that reason, there are quite a few
places in the dungeon where the best—and in some cases only—solution is
the use of a spell such as this.

</div>

### 16. Hidden Staircase

This largely empty area was once a sentry post but is now inhabited by 6
shadows, who attack anyone who enters the room and does not bear one of
the Termaxian passkeys scattered throughout the dungeon. If a passkey is
present, the shadows will withdraw, disappearing from sight, but lying
in wait for the opportunity to attack later should the passkey be
forgotten.

*Shadow*(6) [AL C, MV 90' (30'), AC 7. HD 2+2, HP 13(x2), 12, 11(x3),
\#AT 1, DG 1d4+strength drain, SV F2, ML 12]

<div class="commentary">

16. I was a big fan of James Ward's *Gamma World*as a kid. It was the
second RPG I ever played, after Dungeons & Dragons. In the
post-apocalyptic world described in that game, many ancient facilities
can only be entered through the use of appropriately color-coded I.D.
cards. A similar conceit is present in Gary Gygax's module *Expedition
to the Barrier Peaks* (which is no wonder, given the debt it owed to
*Gamma World*'s predecessor game, *Metamorphosis Alpha*, also by James
Ward). Over the years, I often took inspiration from this idea in other
games. Once Dwimmermount started to take on a lot of science fiction (or
at least science fantasy) elements, I quickly hit upon the notion of
including the equivalent of *Gamma World*'s I.D. cards, namely the
Termaxian passkeys.

Originally, I had grandiose ideas about a whole system of such passkeys,
each “level” distinguished from the others in some way. I wanted to make
their discovery and use vital to advancement through the deeper levels
of the dungeon, not to mention the operation of the magical machines and
devices found therein. These ideas didn't last long. A combination of
laziness on my part, disinterest on the part of my players, and the
general feeling that collecting these passkeys wasn't as fun in practice
as it was in theory resulted in my downplaying them considerably. The
passkeys are still present and they're still useful, but they're not
nearly as vital as I once envisaged. I don't regret changing my mind on
this point. Many times I would come up with notions that didn't survive
contact with the realities of play and I altered or abandoned them. To
my mind, that's what good referees do.

</div>

### 17. Workroom

This room once contained a variety of wooden tables, stools, and
shelves, most of which have long since rotted away or been smashed.
Scattered amongst the debris can be found metal implements and tools,
such as hammers, picks, and saws. The room is damp, owing to some
overflow from the Pool of Life in Room 50. This overflow has encouraged
the growth of a patch of green slime on the floor that will cling to the
first person who steps in the room without specifically looking at the
floor to see if it's clear of any obstacles.

*Green Slime*(1) [AL N, MV 3' (1'), AC NA, no roll needed. HD 2, HP 16,
\#AT 1, DG Special, SV F1, ML 12]

<div class="commentary">

17. Like I said, I love slimes and oozes (not to mention spores, molds,
and fungus).

</div>

### 18. Lounge

This now-empty room once contained wooden tables and chairs, now reduced
to debris. The walls are painted with faded frescoes depicting scenes of
magical research, including what appears to be the creation of monsters
from animals. Amidst the debris can be found several tankards and
drinking cups, one of which is made from silver (worth 250 gp to an
interested buyer).

### 19. Orrery

This circular room contains a large (10-foot diamater) orrery of metal
and hard woods. The orrery is no longer operational, as its power source
has long since been depleted. The device is a scale model of Telluria,
its moon, Ioun, and the other planets with which it shares its solar
system, all enclosed in a transparent, glass-like sphere on which are
situated numerous golden symbols that seem to represent stars. Also
situated on the outside of the sphere are tiny representations of what
look like castles or fortresses. These representations are all
associated with a star symbol and number a dozen in all.

The orrery is bolted to the floor and too large to move. Its interior
components are inaccessible without shattering the transparent sphere
that encloses it. However, the castle representations can be removed
(with effort), as can the golden star symbols. Each one is worth
approximately 5 gp purely for their inherent value, perhaps ten times
that amount to those with an interest in ancient Thulian technology.

<div class="commentary">

19. As a child, I was very interested in astronomy and astrophysics.
Had I had any aptitude with mathematics, I might have gone into one of
those fields, but, alas, I'm hopeless when it comes to numbers. In 1980,
Carl Sagan's *Cosmos*TV series kicked off and I was a big fan. I watched
it with great enthusiasm and my aunt purchased the accompanying book for
me. I still own that book and, even now, flipping through it conjures up
some of the old feelings that series elicited in me way back then.

In one of the episodes—I can't recall which one—Sagan talked about Tycho
Brahe and Johannes Kepler. It was then that I first became aware of the
existence of orreries, which are mechanical models of the solar system.
I thought the very idea of such a thing was amazing. A couple of years
later, I saw the movie, *The Dark Crystal*, in which a huge orrery was
depicted. That fired my imagination even more! As science
fiction/science fantasy came to play a bigger role in Dwimmermount, I
drew on my memories of both *Cosmos*and *The Dark Crystal* and decided
to include an orrery. (As it turns out, there are two orreries in
Dwimmermount, though the second one, on what is now Level 0, is of a
somewhat different nature).

</div>

### 20. Secret Storeroom

This hidden room contains a large collection of spare parts for the
orrery in Room 19 -- planets, stars, etc. These can all be taken from
the room and sold either for the metals from which they're made or for
their value as historical objects. Their value ranges from 5 to 500 gp
each, depending on size and where they are sold, with bigger settlements
being able to afford higher prices. The room also contains a large metal
box with strange red symbols on its exterior. These symbols can be
understood through the use of a *read languages*spell and say, “DANGER!
Handle only with proper protection!” The box is warm to the touch and
locked. If the lock is opened, the characters will find a glass cylinder
containing a glowing silvery-black liquid. This liquid is fuel for the
orrery (and other devices throughout the dungeon). If handled without
proper protection, anyone who touches the cylinder must make a save
versus spells or take 6d6 damage (successful save halves this).

<div class="commentary">

20. *Gamma World*and matters post-apocalyptic intrude once more. When I
refereed *Gamma World*, one of the most fun aspects of it was watching
my friends try to puzzle out what a piece of ancient technology did,
based on my descriptions of them. In most cases, I tried hard to conceal
an item's true function by describing it as someone unfamiliar with its
use might see it. I didn't always succeed in this endeavor and sometimes
my friends would become frustrated with what they felt was my deliberate
vagueness. Even so, I found it fun.

My notion of what Eldritch (and, before that, Great Ancient) devices
were like was strongly influenced by my experiences playing *Gamma
World*, which only made sense, since most fantasy worlds are
post-apocalyptic ones. That may seem like a strange notion, but it
isn't. Consider: most fantasy worlds postulate a past “Golden Age,”
which was better in every way than the present. It was during this time
when great monuments were built and great discoveries were made.
Everything that has come since is but a pale reflection of those Days of
Glory. When you remember that many learned people during the European
Middle Ages felt the same about their time when they compared it to the
Classical civilization that preceded it, it makes sense that many
fantasy roleplaying worlds had inherited this perspective.

I made a point of including lots of examples of fairly mundane magical
technology throughout Dwimmermount, both to hit home how advanced were
the civilizations of the past and also to give me the chance to have fun
like I did in *Gamma World*. Watching an elf try to puzzle out the
purpose of a hazmat suit is really enjoyable.

</div>

### 21. Orc Captors

This area contains 8 orcs who have captured a couple of unfortunate
dwarves who have been exploring Dwimmermount. If there are any dwarves
amongst the characters, the orcs will attempt to use the dwarves as a
bargaining chip in trying to save their own lives, should the battle
turn against them.

*Orcs*(7) [AL C, MV 120' (40'), AC 6. HD 1, HP 7, 5, 4, 3(x2), 2(x2),
\#AT 1, DG 1d8, SV F1, ML 10]

*Orc Leader*(1) [AL C, MV 120' (40'), AC 5. HD 1, HP 8, \#AT 1, DG
1d8+1, SV F1, ML 10]

The orcs have the following treasure: 3000 cp, a topaz (750 gp), an
alexandrite (500 gp), a sardonyx (75 gp), a hematite (10 gp), and an
amethyst (750 gp).

<div class="commentary">

21. While I'm the last person to argue in favor of the ridiculous
proposition that “monsters are people, too,” I do sometimes think that
players are regularly ignore the value of parleying even with hated
enemies. I tried to include lots of opportunities throughout the dungeon
where the characters might encounter monsters or NPCs with whom they
could interact in ways other than through violence. I also made regular
use of morale rules, so that monsters might run away in the face of
superior opposition rather than fight till the death. This worked out
very well in play and led to a number of interesting situations that
otherwise might not have—bargaining with evil anthropomorphic boards,
for instance!

</div>

### 22. Dwarf Captives

This large, empty area contains 2 dwarves who were captured by the orcs
while exploring the dungeon. The dwarves, named Glandal and Thoon, made
their way to Level 2A from the outside entrance connected to the caves
on Level 1. They fought their way past many kobolds, losing other
members of their party (which originally numbered six) before running
into the orcs. The dwarves are currently chained to the wall and have
suffered many indignities at the hands of their bestial captors.

Glandal is a 3rd-level fighter (currently 6 hit points out of a total of
18), while Thoon is only 2nd-level (currently 3 hit points out of a
total of 12). Neither one has any weapons or armor and they know little
of this level, though they remember much about Level 1. Even so, they
will gladly join the characters and assist them in further exploration,
especially if the characters are willing to help them avenge their
fallen comrades on the orcs.

<div class="commentary">

22. As the campaign developed and I got a better sense of what I wanted
to do, I started coming up with lots of “secrets” or “mysteries” that I
wanted that characters to uncover in the course of their explorations.
In a number of cases, I was quite proud of these things and wanted to
ensure the characters eventually learned them. At the same time, I feel
quite strongly that the value of a secret/mystery is heavily dependent
on the difficulty in discovering it. This put me in a funny
place—simultaneously wanting to preserve the secrets and wanting them to
revealed.

I never really resolved this conflict in my mind. Throughout the
entirety of the time I was refereeing my campaign, I was genuinely torn,
particularly over secrets like the origin of the dwarves. That's why I
frequently created NPCs who knew a little more than the characters and
could thus lead them by the nose a bit when I felt frustrated by their
seeming lack of inquisitiveness. Glandal and Thoon were intended to know
a bit more about dwarven history and to push the characters in the right
direction. That didn't happen for a number of reasons, chiefly that I
chickened out in the end. As much as I wanted to “tell all,” I couldn't
bring myself to do it when push came to shove. Consequently, the secret
of dwarven origins was never discovered in my original campaign.

</div>

### 23. Smithy

This room is quite clearly a smithy of some sort, as there is obviously
a forge and an anvil located in the southern portion of the room. There
are also three enclosed fire pits with metal pipes that go into the
ceiling.

### 24a. Balcony

This elevated area overlooks Room 24b. The area contains two heavy
wooden benches and a metal railing.

### 24b. Operating Room

In this room, there is a large slab-like table made of metal. The table
possesses gears and cranks that allow it to be swivelled, elevated, and
turned. The table also possesses leather restraints. There is evidence
of blood or some other type of stain on the table and on the ground
surrounding it.

When the characters enter the room, they will come across a strange
battle between a throghrin and a number of (seemingly) normal rats. The
throghrin, owing to its regeneration ability and overall strength, has
the upper hand.

*Throghrin*(1) [AL C, MV 120' (40'), AC 6, HD 3, HP 15, \#AT 1, DG 1d8,
SV F3, ML 10]

*Rats*(15) [AL N, MV 60' (20'), AC 9, HD 1 hit point each, \#AT 1 per 10
rats, DG 1d6, SV 0LH, ML 5]

If the characters do not intervene, the throghrin will kill all the rats
in fairly short order, after which it will turn on them. On the other
hand, if the characters kill the throghrin, the rats will rush over
toward them and bow in thanks for their assistance. These rats are
servants of the Rat Boss of Adamas and cannot speak Common. However,
they are intelligent and can communicate with anyone under the effects
of the *speak with animals*spell. In such a case, they can provide
fairly detailed information about many of the nearby rooms on this
level. If the characters cannot verbally communicate with the rats, the
rodents will nevertheless try to lead them toward the secret door
leading to Rom 58, as a way of thanking them for their assistance.

<div class="commentary">

24b. The Rat Boss, his origin, and his place in the campaign was touched
on in the commentary to Room 46 on Level 1. Rather than expand on it
here, I'm going to do so in the commentary to Room 60 of this level,
since it's closely tied to that of the Cat King.

</div>

### 25. Worship Area

This irregularly shaped room is decorated with mosaics depicting the
life of Turms Termax, including his apotheosis. The room contains two
statues, one of Turms himself and another of his lover, Sarana. Both
statues are made from a white stone and both are trapped. Anyone not
wearing a symbol of Turms Termax on his person and who attempts to touch
either statue receives an electric shock dealing 2d6 damage (save versus
spells for half damage).

<div class="commentary">

25. The mythology of Turms Termax evolved greatly during the course of
the campaign. As I noted in the comments to Level 1, a big influence on
my conception of him were Richard L. Tierney's stories about Simon of
Gitta (aka Simon Magus of the Acts of the Apostles). Tierney re-imagines
Simon as a Gnostic philosopher and magician who does battle with the
horrors of the Cthulhu Mythos in his quest for personal enlightenment.
Since Simon is the protagonist, he is portrayed somewhat heroically,
especially when compared to the Romans who are his frequent adversaries.

I wasn't interested in portraying Turms as a hero. I'd already
established early on that he was something of a villain—or at least a
self-interested rogue. Plus, there was something satisfying in the way
I'd established the magic-using Eldritch Empire falling before the might
of the god-fearing Thulians, which in turn was corrupted from within by
the magic-using Termaxians. Still, Tierney's Simon was a compelling
character and I wanted to borrow elements from him. 

One element I did borrow—also present in other tales of Simon Magus—was
his “soul mate,” Helen. Helen is the incarnation of the divine female
principle (Sophia) and Simon's aid in his ascent to godhood. Since Turms
was also going to be obsessed with finding a way to achieve immortality,
I thought it only made sense that he, too, would have a female
companion. I decided to use a similar method in coming up with her name
as I had with Turms itself. In this case, I looked at the etymology of
“Helen” and learned that one possible origin is the Indo-European
adjective *sarana* (which means “swift,” as I recall). Sarana sounded
like a plausible female name and so I went with it.

I never developed the character of Sarana very much, since her legend
didn't figure prominently in the campaign. I later imagined that she was
one of the Terrim (see Level 9), but that's an idea that never made any
impact on the campaign and so I consider it only one possible
explanation for who Sarana was and what her role in the story of Turms
Termax might have been. 

</div>

### 26. Scriptorium

This room contains a half-dozen heavy wooden writing desks. The
associated stools were long since removed. Crumbling parchment can be
found inside several of the desks, along with dried ink wells. One of
the desks has a secret compartment inside of which can be found a scroll
containing the spells *magic missile*and *shield*.

### 27. Ruined Chamber

Whatever the original purpose of this room is unclear, as it is now
filled with refuse and debris of various sorts. Rummaging among the
debris are 3 spitting beetles.

*Spitting Beetles*(3) [AL N, MV 120' (40'), AC 4, HD 2, HP 14, 13, 4,
\#AT 1, DG 1d6 + toxic spray, SV F1, ML 9]

### 28. Dressing Room

The walls of this room are covered with metal hooks, on some of which
still hang two heavy silvery-gray suits, along with gloves and boots
made from the same material. On a shelf in the room, there are also two
ceramic helmets that fit on top of the suits. When worn, the suits grant
immunity to certain adverse effects encountered throughout the dungeon,
such as the energy source found in Room 20. The suits confer as AC 7
while wearing them, but are stiff and bulky, which prohibits the casting
of any type of spell (including clerical spells).

The room is currently being used as a lair by 3 ghouls, who will
gleefully attack any creature who enters the room.

*Ghouls*(3) [AL C, MV 90' (30'), AC 6, HD 2, HP 13, 10, 3, \#AT 3, DG
1d3/1d3/1d3 + paralysis, SV F2, ML 9]

The concealed door in the room covers a metal ladder that leads first to
the short corridor ending in a secret door connected to Room 56 and to
Room 48 on Level 3A. The ghouls use it both to travel between levels and
to seek out food in nearby rooms. More information on the ghoul colony
and its origins can be found in the chapter detailing Level 3A (The
House of Portals).

<div class="commentary">

28. I used most of the monsters found in OD&D when populating
Dwimmermount. However, I regularly tried to put my own spin on them. One
monster with which I did this was the ghoul. A recurring theme in the
campaign was the finality of death and the possibility of immortality. A
great many of the campaign's mysteries focuses on such matters,
including, as I've noted, that of Turms Termax. When I got around to
re-imagining ghouls, I saw them as Men who sought to achieve immortality
through the consumption of human flesh. They were individuals who had
willingly become cannibals—and necrophages – in order to achieve
undeath. This isn't an original idea. I'm certain I was heavily
influenced by H.P. Lovecraft's conception of ghouls in coming up with
this idea.

</div>

### 29. Storeroom

This storeroom is filled with wooden crates containing rotting cloth.
One of the crates, however, contains a silvery-black “cloth” fashioned
into robes that, when worn, confer the same armor class as leather armor
(AC7) without restricting movement or in any way being heavier than
ordinary cloth. Thus, a magic-user could wear these robes without
penalty. The crate contains a dozen such robes, which might fetch up to
100 gp each in a large settlement, like Adamas.

The room also serves as the lair of 9 giant rats. These rats are
unintelligent and not at all friendly toward those found in Room 24b.

*Giant Rats*(9) [AL N, MV 120' (40'), AC 7, HD 1d4 hitpoints each, HP
4(x4), 3(x2), 2, 1(x2), \#AT 1, DG 1d3 + disease, SV F1, ML 6]

<div class="commentary">

35. As a rule, I don't fret too much about the practical aspects of
dungeon life. I tend more toward the “mythic underworld” conception that
Jason “Philotomy Jurament” Cone popularized through his OD&D Musings web
page.  Nevertheless, I still wanted to make an effort to include rooms,
such as latrines, pantries, and dormitories, since Dwimmermount was
supposed to have been a fortress in ancient times. I suspect I was more
consistent about this on the early levels than I was on later ones.

</div>


### 30. Empty Room

This room is now devoid of anything except marks on its stone floor
indicating where furniture of some sort was once bolted down. The
furniture -- and anything else -- has long since been removed, leaving
behind only dust.

### 31. Gaol

The door to this room is locked. Beyond it lies three cells used to hold
prisoners, each of which is itself locked. Except for some clearly
nonhuman bones in one of the cells, they are all completely empty.

### 32. Guard Post

Six orcs are on guard in this room, protecting the rooms their kind
occupies to the south. If outnumbered or if they break morale, they will
flee to Room 33 to seek aid.

*Orcs*(6) [AL C, MV 120' (40'), AC 6. HD 1, HP 6, 4, 3, 2, 1(x2), \#AT
1, DG 1d8, SV F1, ML 10]

### 33. Barracks

This large room was once a barracks for troops stationed on this level
of Dwimmermount. Some of its wooden bunks remain, but most have either
been removed or reduced to splinters. Currently, the room houses 5 orcs
and an orc champion, who will come to the aid of the orcs in Room 32 if
summoned by the sounds of combat (or orcs fleeing the other room).

*Orcs*(5) [AL C, MV 120' (40'), AC 6. HD 1, HP 5, 4, 2(x3), \#AT 1, DG
1d8, SV F1, ML 10]

*Orc Champion*(1) [AL C, MV 120' (40'), AC 5. HD 1, HP 8, \#AT 1, DG
1d8+1, SV F1, ML 10]

Between them, these orcs have 1000 gp in ancient Thulian coinage.

### 34. Refectory

This eating area was used by Thulian troops in the past. Now, it's been
turned into an area where the orcs dump their garbage and waste. The
place reeks of rotting animal matter and is filled with bones and other
detritus. If anyone is brave enough to spend 1d4 turns digging through
the mess, they can find a carnelian (75 gp), a carved idol (200 gp), a
gold clasp (200 gp), and assorted silver coins equal to 400 sp in value.
Anyone who does so must also make a save vs. poison (at +2) every turn
spent searching or contract a disease that, one week later, reduces
their maximum hit points by 50% for a week's duration. The disease is
curable either by two day's bed rest or spells like *cure disease*.

### 35. Latrine

This small room was a latrine in Thulian times. One of its toilets
remain intact, but otherwise the room is largely empty. There are pipes
connecting its toilets to the wall, but they heavily rusted and too
narrow to allow even the smallest humanoid-shaped creatures to enter
them.

### 36. Guard Post

2 Orcs stand guard here. One of them possesses a Termaxian passkey on
his person, though he has no idea that “the shiny” is anything more than
a pretty bauble. If outnumbered, the orcs will flee through Room 37 to
Room 38.

*Orcs*(2) [AL C, MV 120' (40'), AC 6. HD 1, HP 5, 3, \#AT 1, DG 1d8, SV
F1, ML 10]

One of the orcs has a citrine (100 gp).

### 37. Phosphorescent Room

The original purpose of this room cannot be easily determined, as its
ceiling and walls are now covered in a strange phosphorescent fungus.
The fungus gives off a yellowish-green glow that Men find glaring (it
has no effect on dwarves or elves -- or orcs), resulting in a -1 to
effective armor class and to attack rolls while in this room. The fungus
is otherwise harmless.

<div class="commentary">

37. As I said before, fungus = the Weird in my imagination.

</div>

### 38. Armory

This armory contains racks that hold Thulian metal crossbows. These
light crossbows deal +1 damage with a successful attack. Unfortunately
for anyone entering the room, 6 orcs are also in this room, all armed
with the crossbows, which they will not hesitate to use on intruders. If
alerted by their comrades from Room 36, they will set themselves up to
attack through Room 37, taking advantage of the adverse effects of the
phosphorescent fungus on Men.

*Orcs*(6) [AL C, MV 120' (40'), AC 6. HD 1, HP 7(x2), 6(x2), 4, 3, \#AT
1, DG 1d6+1, SV F1, ML 10]

<div class="commentary">

38. I wanted to convey that Thulian civilization (and, before it, that
of the Eld and the Great Ancients) was more advanced than the one that
arose in its immediately aftermath (i.e. the current campaign setting).
I didn't want to do this by making every piece of equipment the
characters encountered explicitly magical, let alone high-tech. I wasn't
always sure how to do this, so I experimented with different approaches.
One of them led to the creation of various “Thulian” items, such as the
Thulian crossbow, which is a kind of “magic item lite.” I'm not
convinced these items served the purpose I had in mind, but that's one
of those things you can only discover by trial and error.

</div>


### 39. Treasury

Hidden behind a secret door is a substantial hoard of treasure, unknown
even to the orcs who inhabit the nearby rooms. Inside this treasury can
be found 1000 cp, 4000 sp, 3000 gp, a gold statue (1700 gp), earrings
(900 gp), a hairpin (600 gp), a brooch (1800 gp), a silver chain (500
gp), a *ring of protection +1*, a *potion of clairaudience,*and a
*potion of heroism*.

### 40. Meeting Room

This room contains a single long table made of hardwood. There are no
chairs anywhere to be found. The table is intact, although there is a
series of notches carved (or slashed) along the edge closest to the
door.

### 41. Orc Lair

This large room is now home to an orc chief and his bodyguards. The
chief has plundered wood and metal from other rooms to create a
makeshift throne for himself in this room, on which he is fond of
sitting. Near his throne are metal spikes on which can be found the
heads of two dwarves (former companions of Glandal and Thoon in Room
22).

*Orcs*(6) [AL C, MV 120' (40'), AC 6. HD 1, HP 6(x2), 5(x3), 2, \#AT 1,
DG 1d8, SV F1, ML 10]

*Orc Chief*(1) [AL C, MV 120' (40'), AC 4. HD 4, HP 15, \#AT 1, DG
1d8+2, SV F1, ML 10]

The orc chief carries a *shield +1*, which he uses in combat. His
treasure consists of 1000 gp in a locked chest (the chief has the key
around his neck), as well as a moonstone (75 gp), a zircon (250 gp), and
a jasper (100 gp), which he keeps in a pouch on his person.

### 42. Alcove

The walls of this alcove are decorated with mosaics and in surprisingly
good shape. The mosaics depict magicians using the Pool of Life in Room
50 to create orcs and other monsters.

### 43. Landing

This open area is located about 10 feet below the rest of the level, as
are all the Rooms numbered 43 through 60. All these rooms also have
sockets in each of their walls into which glow bulbs (see Room 44) can
be placed to provide illumination.

### 44. Glow Bulb Storage

This locked room contains many metal boxes filled with glow bulbs --
grapefruit-sized glass orbs filled with a clear liquid. When placed in a
socket in the wall, the bulb activates and emits light like the
magic-user spell of the same name. The liquid within the bulbs is highly
toxic (save versus poison at -2 or die) if imbibed and acts like oil
that burns for twice as long if set alight.

<div class="commentary">

44. The glow bulbs are another example of my attempts to portray
Thulian civilization as an advanced one. The glow bulbs are simply
oversized light bulbs of unusual design. They were never much used in
the campaign as means of illumination. They were, however, used as
incendiary devices.

You'll note that I don't mention in my key exactly how many glow bulbs
are in each box or how many boxes there are. I won't say that was
deliberate, because it wasn't. Rather, that's not the kind of detail
that matters much to me. If knowing precisely how many are there becomes
important in play, I'll come up with an answer. Otherwise, I don't sweat
it.

</div>

### 45. Hallway

This hallway contains a metal device along its eastern wall. The device
is covered with dials and gauges and is humming faintly. The device is
connected to a series of metal pipes that run up the wall, across the
ceiling, and above the door leading into Room 46. The device controls
the emission of a weakened form of azoth from the pipes, as part of an
alchemical experiment recently restarted by Varezes (see Room 50). This
machine can be shut down by turning of the correct dials.

The hallway is currently occupied by a carcass scavenger.

*Carcass Scavenger*(1) [AL C, MV 120' (40'), AC 7. HD 3+1, HP 11, \#AT
8, DG Paralysis, SV F2, ML 9]

### 46. Thorny Room

This chamber is overgrown with thorns. Along the ceiling are a series of
metal pipes, connecting it to Room 45. The pipes continue beyond the
door to the south and into Room 47. These pipes, on close inspection,
have fine holes along some of their lengths. The room itself contains 5
archer bushes that react to the presence of any living things and
attack.

*Archer Bushes*(5) [AL N, MV 10' (3'), AC 6. HD 2, HP 13, 11(x2), 10, 7,
\#AT 1, DG 1d4, SV F1, ML 12]

<div class="commentary">

46. Again, probably owing to my love of *Gamma World*, I like the
notion of mutagenic substances. I wanted to include magical mutagens in
Dwimmermount. Since I'd already established the existence of azoth, it
was a small leap to imagine that it had mutagenic effects on living
things, in addition to its other effects. To emphasize this, I conceived
of some rooms filled with plants exposed to azoth. These plants would be
“alive” after the fashion of so many pulp fantasies—reacting to the
presence of the characters and attacking them when they came close.

</div>

### 47. Rose Garden

Inexplicably, this room looks like a garden, complete with a stone path
running from the east and then splitting toward the north and the west.
Elsewhere, the room is filled with bushes of white roses that look
unhealthy and shrivelled, as if in need of nourishment. The metal pipes
on the ceiling go toward the western exit but not toward the northern
one. One of the rose bushes is in fact a vampire rose that will attack
any creature that passes by it.

*Vampire Rose*(1) [AL N, MV 5' (1'), AC 5. HD 4, HP 17, \#AT 1, DG 1d4+2
+ blood drain, SV F3, ML 12]

### 48. Pump Room

This room is filled with metal pipes and tubing, as well as containing a
piece of large machinery that appears to be some kind of pump. Some of
the pipes are located on the ceiling and connect with those coming from
Rooms 47 and 49. Both the pipes and machinery are covered with a
blackish “rust” and occasionally drip a silvery-black liquid that tastes
bitter if consumed (but otherwise has no effect).

### 49. Stasis Chamber

The door to this very large chamber is locked. The room itself contains
two dozen glass tubes that stand slightly taller than a human being. The
tubes are found in four rows of six and have dials and switches located
on metal plates at their base. The tubes also have a hinged door with a
metal handle. All but two of the tubes are empty. The occupied ones
contain a young human male, dressed in non-descript clothing, and an
older human female, dressed similarly. They do not appear to be alive
(no obvious breathing, etc.) but, if dead, they are perfectly preserved.
The two occupied tubes hum and glow slightly, while the others do not.

The glass from which the tubes are made is sturdy and can withstand 100
hit points of damage before shattering. Shattering the occupied tubes
has two immediate effects. First, anyone within 10 feet receives an
electric shock dealing 3d6 damage (save versus spells for half damage).
Second, the the humans inside the tube are released. The humans are in
fact alive. They will awaken, perplexed by their surroundings. They
speak only High Thulian and do so with archaic accents. The man is
Colluthus and the woman is Arethusa, who placed themselves into stasis
during the fall of Dwimmermount two hundred years ago. More information
about them and their activities can be found on page XX.

<div class="commentary">

49. This is another example (like the dwarves in Room 22) of where I
placed some knowledgeable NPCs through whom I could convey background
information to the characters. In this case, the two characters I
included were Termaxian cultists who'd been trapped in Dwimmermount
since its fall. As with the dwarves, I didn't wind up using these
cultists in that fashion. In fact, I didn't use them at all! I realized
that the characters in my campaign weren't likely to interact positively
with Colluthus and Arethusa, since they had come to be strongly opposed
to the Termaxians. Moreover, I worried that it'd be too easy to reveal
more information than I wanted through them. Since they were actually in
Dwimmermount at the time of its fall, they might too easily “spill the
beans” about its past.

So, when the players reached this room, I got rid of the Termaxians and
replaced them instead with Dr Mason Halsey, a displaced human scientist
from our Earth. Halsey was a researcher on Project Phoenix, a US
government endeavor designed to open portals to other worlds. Displaced
Earthmen are common protagonists in a lot of the pulp fantasy fiction
that inspired D&D. I even created a character class—the Stranger—that
was intended to emulate this literary archetype. I thought it would fun
to include such a character in Dwimmermount, too.

The advantage of Dr Halsey was that, as an outsider, he would have no
idea about Dwimmermount's history. Indeed, he had no idea about where he
was or how he got here. His purpose in the campaign was twofold. First,
I simply wanted to indulge my own fancy. Second, I wanted to set the
stage for some additional “high level” revelations about the campaign
setting. At that time, I was toying with the notion that Telluria (as I
called the setting) was our Earth in the very future, after some kind of
techno-magical apocalypse. I abandoned that notion eventually, but it
was something I seriously considered at one point and Dr Halsey was to
be a big part of revealing it. I was reading a lot of Jack Vance and
Clark Ashton Smith when I came up with this, so this seemed like a
logical development to me.

Like so many aspects of my campaign, though, it faded away over time.
Once I rejected the Telluria-as-future-Earth idea, Dr Halsey ceased to
have any meaningful role. I didn't formally get rid of him, but he
appeared less and less in our sessions. Eventually, he was largely
forgotten. In retrospect, I feel bad about this, but that's the way I
run my campaigns. Sometimes an idea takes hold and I run with it and
sometimes it doesn't. This was a case where it didn't.

</div>

### 50. The Pool of Life

This chamber holds the Pool of Life, an alchemical/magical device used
by the former masters of Dwimmermount to alter and bend living things to
their will. The Pool itself is a large pool filled with white
protoplasm, with a glass barrier surrounding it. The barrier is
currently lowered, but it can be raised again by using the controls in
Room 14. If the protoplasm leaves the Pool, it eventually loses its
viscosity and becomes a clear liquid not dissimilar to water. There is
evidence of some of this liquid on the floor flowing from the Pool
toward the southern wall. The room also contains nine niches in the
wall, all of which is occupied by a rectangular glass case. Inside three
of these cases can be found thick liquids of pink, brown, and black
varieties. The black liquid is almost completely depleted.

Currently, the room is occupied by the renegade magic-user, Varazes,
formerly part of the expedition from Volmar (see Level 3A), who has
decided to set himself up as the new ruler of Dwimmermount through the
creation of beastmen to serve him. The orcs on this level and Level 1
are his earliest creation, but they proved too willful and broke away
from his control. Varazes is currently creating gnolls, over whom he has
demonstrated a greater command. When the characters enter, Varazes is
present, along with five gnolls.

The five gnolls will work to protect Varazes, who will alternate between
casting spells and creating additional gnolls to protect him. Creating a
new gnoll takes 2 rounds of uninterrupted work at a control panel near
the Pool of Life. New gnolls have only 2 hit points (though they gain 2
additional hit points per round until they reach 6 hit points) and no
weapons. 

If events turn against him, Varazes will flee toward Room 57 (and then
into Room 58) to escape death. If captured, he will make no mention of
his origins in Volmar, instead trying to pass himself off as a local
magician. However, his strange accent and lack of knowledge about local
affairs quickly reveal him to be a liar. Varazes is a coward and will do
almost anything to save his life. Of course, he is also duplicitous and
self-serving and will try to lead to his captors into dangerous
situations that might result in their deaths.

*Gnolls*(5) [AL C, MV 90' (30'), AC 5. HD 2, HP 15, 10, 8, 7, 6 \#AT 1,
DG 1d8+1, SV F2, ML 8]

*Hyenas*(2) [AL N, MV 120' (40'), AC 7. HD 3, HP 15, 13 \#AT 1, DG 2d4,
SV F3, ML 9]

*Varazes*[AL C, MV 120' (40'), AC 7, HD 3, HP 9, \#AT 1, DG 1d4 or by
spell, SV MU3, ML 10] -- Spells Memorized: *Charm Person, Sleep, Web.*He
has a *ring of protection +2* and a *wand of fear*(6 charges left). He
also has a Termaxian passkey.

The Pool of Life itself can be used in several ways. Anyone completely
immersing himself within it must make a saving throw versus poison.
Those who *fail* have all their hit points restored and all diseases or
other deleterious effects removed. Such a character cannot use the Pool
again for a number of days equal to the amount by which he failed his
saving throw. Thus, if a character had a saving throw of 14 and his
player rolled a 12, the character cannot use the Pool again for 2 days.
Those who succeed at the saving throw gain no benefit from the Pool. No
character, regardless of whether he succeeded in his saving throw or
not, can gain any benefit from the Pool more than once in a 24-hour
period.

A dead creature placed within the Pool within 24 hours of death is
restored to life, but loses one point of Constitution from the ordeal.
Likewise, there is a cumulative 20% chance per use that the restored
character will be afflicted with a *feeblemind*spell (no saving throw),
as if cast by a 12th-level magic-user.

The colored liquids are “essential matrices” that can be used to create
up to a dozen beastmen of the appropriate sort. Using the controls to
the Pool of Life, a character can siphon liquid from one of the glass
cases into the Pool and a beastman will emerge 2 rounds later. The pink
liquid creates orcs, while the brown liquid creates gnolls. There is
enough of each type of liquid to create up to a dozen of each type
(though there may be less available for gnolls, depending on the actions
of Varazes). These beastmen will *not*obey the commands of their creator
automatically, but may be cowed into it with an appropriate show of
strength. The black liquid can be used to create 1 minotaur -- to
low-level characters who do so unprepared!

<div class="commentary">

50. When I read about the dungeons where D&D was born—Castles Blackmoor
and Greyhawk—what always struck me about them was how many locations
they had that players not only continued to talk about after the fact
but that their characters returned to again and again. I knew I wanted
to include lots of such rooms in Dwimmermount. The Pool of Life was
intended to be such a room. I hoped the players would find it intriguing
and experiment with its operation. They did do this, though not as often
as I imagined they would, but then that's a constant thread in these
comments.

The Pool was (of course) intended as yet another illustration of the
magical technology found throughout the dungeon. It was also meant as a
rather explicit explanation for the existence of the various beast-men
(like orcs and gnolls). Despite my regular desire to “reveal all”
through the mouths of various NPCs, I preferred to use a “show, don't
tell” approach when it came to conveying information like this. In that
respect, the Pool was a huge success.

The magician Varazes is a Volmarian, from a Thulian successor state to
the south of the main campaign area. I included him here for a number of
reasons, though the chief one was to put a human face on some of the
dangers in Dwimmermount. I also liked him, because he introduced some
nuance into my portrayal of the Volmarians. As I stated in my comments
on Level 1, I initially conceived of the Volmarians as wholly sinister.
Over time, though, I softened my stance and wanted to show that not all
Volmarians were cut from the same cloth. They might be antagonistic to
the peoples of the main campaign area (from a certain point of view) but
they weren't necessarily evil. Varazes, though, was pure evil.

</div>

### 51. The Essence Machines

This room contains two machines of similar design, one of which has been
smashed to pieces and is no longer operational. The other is
operational, but lacks a power source. If given a new one (such as the
one found in Room 20), it will spring to life and function as intended,
provided that a tank of liquid matrix (from Room 52) is connected to it.
Once activated, the machine scans the closest living thing within 5 feet
of it and suffuses its essence into the liquid.

Once done, this “essential matrix” can be used in conjunction with the
Pool of Life to create up to a dozen creatures of the same sort as the
“donor” of the essence. These creatures are not exact copies but they
are broadly similar in appearance to their source. They are also Chaotic
in alignment and, unless cowed, violent toward their creators. They
begin life with 2 hit points, gaining 2 more every round until they
reach a number of hit points equal to that of their donor.

<div class="commentary">

51. I like “evil twins,” so I included the essence machines as a way to
facilitate their appearance in the campaign. They never did so, but it's
good to have the option available.

</div>


### 52. Liquid Matrix Storage Chamber

This room contains a dozen glass containers, all but four of which are
shattered. The four that are intact contain a clear but viscous liquid
that is intended to be used in conjunction with the Essence Machine in
Room 52.

### 53. Vaulted Chamber

This open area has a slightly higher ceiling than the rest of the level,
with attractive mosaics on it, depicting arcane symbols without obvious
meaning. Currently, three ghouls are searching the room for living
things to eat, having come across gnolls here in the past.

*Ghouls*(3) [AL C, MV 90' (30'), AC 6, HD 2, HP 8, 7, 5, \#AT 3, DG
1d3/1d3/1d3 + paralysis, SV F2, ML 9]

In the corner of the room is the gnawed and incomplete skeleton of a
gnoll, near which lies a *sword -1 (cursed)*.

### 54. Study

This room contains a large metal desk, a heavy wooden chair, and
numerous wooden shelves and bookcases on the walls. The shelves are
devoid of anything of value, but the desk's drawers contain notes
written in a strange script on sheets of paper-thin metal. *Read
languages*(or similar effects) enable the script to be read, revealing
detailed instructions on how to use the Pool of Life (Room 50).

### 55. Clock Room

The walls of this room are covered with what appear to be mechanical
clocks. None of the clocks are currently operational and nor are any of
them in synch with one another.

<div class="commentary">

55. I think mechanical clocks are neat, so I included some here. I
didn't have anything in mind when I did so, but if the players had taken
an interest in them, I might well have come up with an explanation.

</div>

### 56. Ghoulish Larder

This room is filled with bones of all sizes and sorts, some of them from
humanoid creatures, but most having come from rats and similar kinds of
vermin. Hidden among the bones is a Termaxian passkey and a *ring of
fire resistance*. Finding either one takes 1 turn of careful searching,
which has a 2 in 6 chance of attracting the attention of the ghouls in
Rooms 28 or 53.

### 57. Gnoll Lair

This former workshop is now home to a number of gnolls created by
Varazes (see Room 50). The gnolls have recently clashed with the ghouls,
which is why they are fewer in number and one among them is obviously
paralyzed and thus unable to attack.

*Gnolls*(3) [AL C, MV 90' (30'), AC 5. HD 2, HP 12, 11, 7, \#AT 1, DG
1d8+1, SV F2, ML 8]

*Gnoll Leader*(1) [AL C, MV 90' (30'), AC 5. HD 3, HP 16, \#AT 1, DG
1d8+1, SV F3, ML 8]

The gnoll leader wears a bejeweled collar worth 500 gp.

<div class="commentary">

57. Since Dwimmermount has a number of factions vying for control of
its various levels, I thought it a good idea to show evidence of their
skirmishes. 

</div>

### 58. Panic Room

This secret room is discoverable only if the character possesses a
Termaxian passkey. Coming within 5 feet of the secret door while in the
possession of one automatically opens the door, revealing a well-stocked
refuge. The room contains enough dried food to last four people for two
weeks, along with potable water in hermetically sealed containers. The
room also contains three *potions of healing* and three suits of
protective gear. Also amongst the supplies is a *dagger +2, +3 versus
goblins, kobolds, and orcs*.

### 59. The Black Room

This room is painted black. Its walls, floor, and ceiling have all been
coated with some type of pigment. The room is otherwise completely
empty.

<div class="commentary">

59. Once more, there's no deep explanation for why this room is painted
entirely black. I simply thought it the kind of strange detail that
might cause the characters to pause and ponder. Such pondering often
inspires me to come up with better ideas than I might otherwise have.
The synergy between some vague notion of my own devising and the
players' attempts to make sense of it can be electric. Those are the
times I look forward to most as a referee. 

</div>

### 60. Alchemical Storage

This area contains many metal shelves, on which can be seen shattered
glass and ceramics. There are also two heavy wooden cabinets whose
contents consist largely of more shattered shards and multicolored
powders. However, one of the cabinets also contains a locked chest made
of metal. Inside the chest are three things of interest: a *potion of
invisibility*, a *scroll of read languages*, and a spherical glass
container with wax stopper, inside of which a small cat seems to be
floating. The cat is not breathing, but there is no evidence that he is
dead either. If the wax stopper is removed, the cat awakens and leaps
out of the container, apparently none the worse for wear.

The cat will cozy up to anyone he deems to be “in charge” among the
characters and will attempt to lead the party out of the dungeon and
toward the surface. The cat is in fact feline royalty, the son of the
King of Cats (see page XX) who reigned over 200 years ago. Like the rats
in Room 24b, the cat is intelligent but does not speak Common. It has
little knowledge of the dungeon (unlike the rats) and is mostly
interested in self-preservation.

<div class="commentary">

60. First of all, the cat in a jar is a reference to the Wizard's
Workroom on Level 1 of Quasqueton, the dungeon described in Mike Carr's
*In Search of the Unknown*. As in that module, I didn't have any purpose
in putting this strange item here except whimsy. I thought it'd mystify
the players and provide a little bit of fun for me. Plus, homages and
allusions are important to me. I see it as a way to pay respect to one's
creative inspirations and module B1 is a huge one for me.

I fully expected that, when the characters unstopped the jar, they'd be
surprised when the cat jumped out and then would let it go without any
fuss. Instead, the cleric in the party, who had memorized *speak with
animals*, decided to ask the cat what he knew. I thought this was
brilliant on several levels. I felt the need to reward this kind of
thinking, so I quickly came up with the idea that the cat was feline
royalty—the son of the King of Cats. The cat, though, disguised his true
identity for a time, unsure of who the characters were or what they were
doing in Dwimmermount. Until he had a better sense of things, he refused
to give his name, leading the magic-user in the party to dub him
“Dusty.”

Dusty knew a bit about Dwimmermount, but his information was somewhat
out of date, since he's been held in that jar for two centuries. What he
really wanted, though, was to return to the City-State of Adamas, where
he hoped to return to the court of the Cat King. Mention of the Cat King
intrigued the characters, who'd never heard of such a personage
before—perfectly reasonable, since I only just invented him! As I
mentioned in the comments to Room 46 on Level 1, I looked to the beast
lords of Michael Moorcock's Elric stories for my initial inspiration,
but I quickly moved beyond that, since Moorcock's conceptions didn't
quite fit with the kind of world I was trying to present.

The characters visited the King of Cats many times, often bargaining
with him for information in exchange for aiding cats in need of
assistance in Adamas and other locales. I'm personally not very fond of
cats, so I tended to portray the King as venal, vain, and selfish. He
kept mice and birds in cages around his throne, which was a pile of
pillows up in the attic of the Doomed Lion tavern. Other cats served him
and there would sometimes be delegations from other animals who wanted
to enlist the aid of the cats.

This is when the idea of the Rat Boss started to appear in my
imagination. I conceived of him as the rodent counterpart of the Cat
King, though more along the lines of a mafia boss (hence his title). He
was completely untrustworthy and the characters knew it, but he was a
lot of fun to roleplay. He had a daughter named Muriel who was a
wererat. The characters rescued her when she was being held captive by
some Termaxian agents who wanted to impress the Rat Boss and his minions
into their service. 

I offhandedly mentioned the existence of a Dog King, too, but the
characters never encountered him.

</div>